---
layout: post
title: Gall's Law
---

<div class="message">
Complex systems evolve from working, simple systems
</div>

## Working Systems, Budgets, and Scheduling

In the 1975 book "Systematics" John Gall observed

>A complex system that works is invariably found to have evolved from a simple system
>that worked. A complex system designed from scratch never works and cannot be patched
>up to make it work. You have to start over with a working simple system.

I think this is eactly correct. Complex systems
must be built on top of robust and well designed
infrastructure. Successful complex systems are not the result
of a Big Bang style massive-build-then-deploy strategy. Instead, succesful
complex systems are the result of a sequence of small projects, each building
on the success of the earlier projects. Estimating the cost and schedule of a
complex system is very much hit or miss. Estimating the cost and schedule of a
small project is a much more well-defined process. Therefore, while one can make
a "best guess" at the budget and schedule for a complex project, this shouldn't be
considered a hard target unless the feature set for the complex project is flexible.
As each small project becomes clearly defined, refine the 
overall budget and schedulei (or feature set) for the complex project. Be very aware that as the
smaller systems feature sets become well-defined and their budgets and schedules are made, the complex
system endpoint budget and schedule (or feature set) **will** need to be revised.

I would say the real value in the initial budget, schedule, and feature set is setting the context
for understanding the limitations and goals of the 'client.' Decisions and tradeoffs that will
inevitably occur as development proceeds are made in the context of the initial requirements, budget,
and schedule.
